[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast this
sunday morning with roger johnson and
rachel vernon hello good morning our
headlines today
stay patient and stay at home england's
deputy chief medical officer
urges millions of people who've been
vaccinated for covert 19
not to break the rules it comes as new
figures show more than 4
000 people are now on a ventilator
that's the highest number since the
pandemic began
boris johnson becomes the first european
leader to take a phone call from the new
u.s president joe biden since his
inauguration
rescued the first group of chinese
miners trapped underground for two weeks
is brought to the surface
good morning the captain steadies the
ship joe root hits another century after
england lose two wickets in quick
succession against sri lanka
good morning well it's going to be a
snow day for some of you today across
england and wales with scenes like these
further north for scotland and for
northern ireland brighter sunshine
but still a few snow showers around as
well i'll have the all
important weather forecast coming up a
little bit later on
hello good morning it's sunday the 24th
of january our main story this morning
one of the government's top
scientists is urging people to abide by
all the coronavirus restrictions even if
fully vaccinated
england's deputy chief medical officer
professor jonathan van tam
says it's possible you can still pass
the virus on efforts to step up the
inoculation drive are continuing
with another after vaccination centers
opening this week dan johnson has this
report
here's a historical setting for the most
modern medicine
at the birthplace of the industrial
revolution the black country living
museum
is joining the rollout of mass
vaccination against covid19
but people won't be visiting the
traditional victorian pharmacy
the vaccines will be given in more
up-to-date facilities specially fitted
out
this is about protecting everybody and
not everybody will have that coverage
in terms of vaccine we're rolling it out
across age-related cohorts
but actually still use the face
protection still wash your hands and
still keep the distance that's still
maintained
and that's been echoed by the deputy
chief medical officer jonathan van tam
who was himself giving vaccinations last
week in a statement
he warned that any change in behavior
even after both doses
could risk passing on the virus he says
regardless of whether someone has had
their vaccination or not
it is vital that everyone follows the
national restrictions
and public health advice as protection
takes up to three weeks to kick in
and we don't yet know the impact of
vaccines on transmission
he also defended the decision to delay
second doses so that more people can get
the first
with over 4 000 patients now on
ventilators
more than at any time in the pandemic
the pressure on hospitals keeps building
last week nhs england managed an average
of 140 jabs
every minute all kinds of buildings are
being used so whether it's the cinema
isles
or cathedral pews the idea is to reach
as many people as possible across
different communities
geography is also important this pilot
project in rural wales
is for those who can't travel to larger
vaccination centers
i admire the logistics of today to see
1200 people come here in in this
location
several practices really shows a great
commitment i think it's very important
because
going a long way when you're 80 you
can't do it
transmission rates remain high though 33
552 new cases were recorded in the last
24-hour period and another 1 348 people
have died after testing positive for
coronavirus
more sites like this will be needed as
the vaccination rollout keeps growing
5.8 million first doses have been given
now across the uk
but still a long way to go before we can
focus back on the future
dan johnson bbc news now boris johnson's
become the first european leader to
speak to the new u.s president joe biden
since he entered the white house the
prime minister said he looked forward to
deepening the long-standing alliance
between the two countries
is our political correspondent chris
mason
thumbs up if you've got through to the
president
the prime minister on the phone to
president biden last night
the first european leader to receive a
call from him
since inauguration day i'm told the
conversation lasted for about 35 minutes
with boris johnson describing the new
administration's early announcements as
fantastic and saying they represented a
moment of hope in a dark time
a statement from downing street after
the call said the prime minister warmly
welcomed the president's decision to
rejoin the
paris agreement on climate change and
his commitment to reach net zero carbon
emissions
by 2050 the focus on climate change
matters because it's an issue where both
leaders agree but it matters
particularly to the uk
because the government here is hosting a
big international summit on climate
change
known as cop 26 in glasgow
in november the order in which a new
american president calls international
leaders is always something of a
political spectator sport
it's a crude measure of relative
importance but
a measure nonetheless remember this
holding hands at the white house almost
exactly four years ago
the then prime minister theresa may
rolling up within a week of president
trump's inauguration
the first international leader to arrive
not quite so straightforward in a
pandemic
downing street said the leaders looked
forward to meeting in person
as soon as circumstances allow chris
mason bbc news
well let's talk to our political
correspondent helen katz he's in our
london newsroom
for us this morning helen the prime
minister the first european
leader to speak to the new president no
doubt there's a little bit of a tick in
the box for that
for boris johnson but i guess the
crucial thing is
how quickly you might get a trade deal
done with the us
absolutely and that is one area where
actually there is a bit of a difference
between the two readouts as they're
known that's the summary of the call
that are given by
each side to the press so from downing
street their readout told us that
the two leaders discussed the benefits
of a potential free trade deal
and the prime minister reiterated his
intention to resolve existing trade
issues
as soon as possible now that's a
reference to an ongoing dispute around
the airplane manufacturer of boeing
which means that as part of that at the
moment the us is levying uh
to import tariffs on scotch whiskey but
when you look at what the white house
has to say about their discussions on
trade
well it doesn't it's not in their
readout at all so i think that is going
to
to perhaps raise questions about uh
quite how far
up joe biden's to-do list a trade deal
with the uk
is we know that the downing street is
very keen to get one agreed we know that
the last administration was very much on
board with that but i think this is
going to raise some questions
the fact that he did get the first calls
the first european leader though
i think is significant it might sound a
bit playground but actually these things
are important
this stuff does matter and certainly now
at a point when the uk
is trying to re-establish its place in
the world as as
a on its own right if you like not as
part of that wider
eu trading block it is going to be
significant and they did find
much to agree on as you heard in chris's
report there so i think that will
certainly uh
cheer downing street helen thank you
helen cutler
now chinese state media are reporting
that 11 gold miners have been rescued
after being trapped for
two weeks in a mining accident in
shandong province in china
an explosion at the mine left them
stranded 600 meters
underground we can now speak to our
china correspondent stephen mcdonald
who's in beijing and we've seen some of
the pictures of these
miners being brought to the surface do
we know anything more about the kind of
condition they're in stephen
yeah well it's all happened very quickly
first there was one minor out then they
taught us there were seven and now
11. these minors the main
group of them 10 together would thought
it was going to take two weeks to reach
them because they had to push
a rescue tunnel 600 meters underground
to where they were
somehow rather though they've managed to
clear a ventilation shaft
and then suddenly today brought them all
up
as they reach the surface their eyes are
blindfolded against the light you know
they've been underground now for two
weeks
and they're looking in a pretty tough
condition some of them some walking out
others
having to be taken out on stretchers
placed in ambulances and then raced off
to hospital for treatment as you would
expect
now you'd hope that those 11 survivors
that now they've got them to hospital
they're going to make it
one of them though it's unclear how he's
managed to survive i mean the 10 who
were together
they were getting these food ration
packs sent through to them for days
they went initially for a week without
contact with the outside but then
they've had food
they've had uh connection with the
outside but one miner by himself
two weeks underground has come out alive
somehow or other so
quite a miraculous recovery rescue if i
could put it that way
good news but then lots of questions
still to be asked about
how this blast happened in the first
place why it took
30 hours for it to be reported and how
these types of accidents can be stopped
in the future in china
and such a delicate process to actually
get to the trapped miners do we have any
idea how they
managed it stephen i don't know if you
have any of those details
yeah well it it like i said that had 10
tunnels
going down to them two of which were
being used just to try and
remove the rising underground water
because the fear was they would drown
before the rescue tunnel could be pushed
through to them and the rescue tunnels
were stopping at various points because
the granite is very tough there
and it and they they sort of drill a
certain distance and wouldn't be able to
go any further
but then today somehow or other as i say
we don't know the details but they've
cleared out a ventilation shaft
which was already in existence all the
way to where they'd been
somehow rather they've cleared the
debris in that
this obviously was quite a big shaft big
enough to get
all 10 of those miners who were together
out via that shaft and the single miner
by himself
it's still unclear well it's unclear to
to us we haven't been told
how they managed to get him out i'm sure
amazing stories will emerge ultimately
thank you very much stephen macdonald
talking to us from beijing
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full
story with bbc dot co dot uk forward
slash news
follow the story for all the latest with
bbc news